Register for Classes
Preparing for Registration

To prepare for registration, visit your Student Center to:

Find your enrollment appointment date and time
Clear any holds on your account
Access degree planning and class scheduling tools to determine which courses you need
Registration information for the upcoming term is typically available during week 4 or 5 of the current term. Specific dates can be found in the Student Center, on the enrollment apppointments webpage, and in the Planning Calendar for the term.

Check Enrollment Appointment Date & Time
Clear All Registration Holds
Understanding Your Curriculum & Course Options

There are three primary tools you can consult each term to help determine which courses you need to complete. Students are encouraged to make a graduation plan during their first year and reference that plan each term.

Degree Progress Report
Flowchart
Degree Planner
How to Register for Classes

At Cal Poly, there are several ways to register for classes when your enrollment appointment window is open. Cal Poly offers two rounds of registration—Round 1 and Round 2.

Round 1 Registration: Begins for you at the time of your Round 1 enrollment appointment / Ends at the close of Round 1 registration. You can register at any point during this window of time.
Round 2 Registration: Begins for you at the time of your Round 2 enrollment appointment / Ends at the close of Round 2 registration. You can register at any point during this window of time.
Open Enrollment: Enrollment appointments are no longer required to complete the registration process.
All of the enrollment methods described below can be accessed in your Student Center.

Schedule Builder | Build & Enroll in a Full Schedule
Add a Specific Course
Helpful Links

RESOURCE	EXPLANATION	WHERE TO FIND MORE INFORMATION
Cal Poly Catalog	Overview of programs, courses, and requirements. Each student comes in under a certain catalog and is held to the degree requirements outlined in that specific catalog.	Cal Poly Catalog website
Dates and Deadlines	Important information to be aware of each term	Office of the Registrar's Student Planning Calendar
Degree Planner	Degree planning tool which provides you with a personalized, pre-populated path to graduation	Degree Planner website
Degree Progress Report (DPR)	Tracks your completed, in progress, and unsatisfied degree requirements	Degree Progress Report (DPR)
Drops | Withdrawals | Leaves	Overview of drops, withdrawals, and leave policies	Drops, Withdraws, and Leaves
Fees & Payments	Payment information	Student Accounts website
Forms (i.e. Late Enrollment Appeals, Time Conflict Requests, Withdrawals)	Overview of forms through the Office of the Registrar	Office of the Registrar Forms 
Permission Numbers	Enrolling in a class through special permission	Permission number information
Registration workshops	Workshops to learn more about how to register at Cal Poly	Attend a registration workshop
Student Center	Central location to register for classes, financial aid information, view enrollment appointment, update personal information	Student Center webpage
Term Typically Offered	View when classes are normally offered throughout the year	Term Typically Offered webpage
 

First Time Freshmen Block Schedule
All first time freshmen will have their fall class schedule created for them. Your class schedule will be based off of your major, survey responses, and credit through Advanced Placement exams, IB, or community college credit.

You will get your block schedule in August and more information will be shared with you at Student Life Orientation Days (SLO Days)

More about your Fall Block Schedule